--- PAGE 1 ---
1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023  
 (ACT NO. 45 OF 2023)  
[As on the  6th October, 2025]  
  


--- PAGE 2 ---
2 
 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED  
G.S.R.              . . . .            .            for           General Statutory Rules.   
S.O.                 . . . . .            ,,              Statutory Order.  
Notifn.   . . . . .  ,,    Notification.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
3 
 THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
3. General explanations.  
CHAPTER II  
OF PUNISHMENTS  
4. Punishments.  
5. Commutation of sentence.  
6. Fractions of terms of punishment.  
7. Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or partly rigorous or simple.  
8. Amount of fine, liability in default of payment of fine, etc.  
9. Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences.  
10. Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, judgment stating that it is doubtful of 
which.  
11. Solitary confinement.  
12. Limit of solitary confinement.  
13. Enhanced punishment for certain offences after previous conviction.  
CHAPTER III  
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS  
14. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bound, by law.  
15. Act of Judge when acting judicially.  
16. Act done pursuant to judgment or order of Court.  
17. Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing himself justified, by law.  
18. Accident in doing a lawful act.  
19. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to prevent other harm.  
20. Act of a child under seven years of age.  
21. Act of a child above seven and under twelve years of age of immature understanding.  
22. Act of a person of unsound mind.  
23. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his will.  
24. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed by one who is intoxicated.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
4 
 SECTIONS  
25. Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, done by consent.  
26. Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for person's benefit.  
27. Act done in good faith for benefit of child or person of unsound mind, by, or by consent of 
guardian.  
28. Consent known to be given under fear or misconception.  
29. Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm caused.  
30. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent.  
31. Communication made in good  faith.  
32. Act to which a person is compelled by threats.  
33. Act causing slight harm.  
Of right of private defence  
34. Things done in private defence.  
35. Right of private defence of body and of property.  
36. Right of private defence against act of a person of unsound mind, etc.  
37. Acts against which there is no right of private defence.  
38. When right of private defence of body extends to causing death.  
39. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death.  
40. Commencement and continuance of right of private defence of body.  
41. When right of private defence of property extends to causing death.  
42. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death.  
43. Commencement and continuance of right of private defence of property.  
44. Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is risk of harm to innocent person.  
CHAPTER IV  
OF ABETMENT, CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT  
of abetment  
45.  Abetment of a thing.  
46. Abettor.  
47. Abetment in India of offences outside India.  
48. Abetment outside India for offence in India.  
49. Punishment of abetment if act abetted is committed in consequence and where no express 
provision is made for its punishment.  
50. Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with different intention from that of 
abettor.  
51. Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act done.  
52. Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted and for act done.  
53. Liability of abettor for an effect caused by act abetted different from that intended by abettor.  
54. Abettor present when offence is committed.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
5 
 SECTIONS  
55. Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.  
56. Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment.  
57. Abetting commission of offence by public or by more than ten persons.  
58. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.  
59. Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it is his duty to prevent.  
60. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with imprisonment.  
Of criminal conspiracy  
61. Criminal conspiracy.  
Of attempt  
62. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with imprisonment for life or other 
imprisonment.  
 
CHAPTER V  
OF OFFENCES AGAINST WOMAN AND CHILD  
Of sexual offences  
63. Rape.  
64. Punishment for rape.  
65. Punishment for rape in certain cases.  
66. Punishment for causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of victim.  
67. Sexual intercourse by husband upon his wife during separation.  
68. Sexual intercourse by a person in authority.  
69. Sexual intercourse by employing deceitful means, etc.  
70. Gang rape.  
71. Punishment for repeat offenders.  
72. Disclosure of identity of victim of certain offences, etc.  
73. Printing or publishing any matter relating to Court proceedings without permission.  
Of criminal force and assault against woman  
74. Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty.  
75. Sexual harassment.  
76. Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe.  
77. Voyeurism.  
78. Stalking.  
79. Word, gesture or act intended to insult modesty of a woman.  
Of offences relating to marriage  
80. Dowry death.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
6 
 SECTIONS  
81. Cohabitation caused by man deceitfully inducing belief of lawful marriage.  
82. Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife.  
83. Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful marriage.  
84. Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married woman.  
85. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.  
86. Cruelty defined.  
87. Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage, etc.  
Of causing miscarriage, etc.  
88. Causing miscarriage.  
89. Causing miscarriage without woman's consent.  
90. Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage.  
91. Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to cause to die after birth.  
92. Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to culpable homicide.  
Of offences against child  
93. Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years of age, by parent or person having 
care of it.  
94. Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body.  
95. Hiring, employing or engaging a child to commit an offence.  
96. Procuration of child.  
97. Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years of age with intent to steal from its person.  
98. Selling child for purposes of prostitution, etc.  
99. Buying child for purposes of prostitution, etc.  
CHAPTER VI  
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY  
Of offences affecting life  
100. Culpable homicide.  
101. Murder.  
102. Culpable homicide by causing death of person other than person whose death was intended.  
103. Punishment for murder.  
104. Punishment for murder by life -convict.  
105. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.  
106. Causing death by negligence.  
107. Abetment of suicide of child or person of unsound mind.  
108. Abetment of suicide.  
109. Attempt to murder.  
110. Attempt to commit culpable homicide.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
7 
 SECTIONS  
111. Organised crime.  
112. Petty  organi sed crime.  
113. Terrorist act.  
Of hurt  
114. Hurt.   
115. Voluntarily  causing hurt.  
116. Grievous hurt.  
117. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.  
118. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means.  
119. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal act.  
120. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to extort confession, or to compel restoration of 
property.  
121. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to deter public servant from his duty.  
122. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt on provocation.  
123. Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to commit an offence.  
124. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid, etc.  
125. Act endangering life or personal safety of others.  
Of wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement  
126. Wrongful restraint.  
127. Wrongful confinement.  
Of criminal force and assault  
128. Force.  
129. Criminal force.  
130. Assault.  
131. Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on grave provocation.  
132. Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty.  
133. Assault or criminal force with intent to dishono ur person, otherwise than on grave 
provocation.  
134. Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of property carried by a person.  
135. Assault or criminal force in attempt to wrongfully confine a person.  
136. Assault or criminal force on grave provocation.  
Of kidnapping, abduction, slavery and forced labour  
137. Kidnapping.  
138. Abduction.  
139. Kidnapping or maiming a child for purposes of begging.  
140. Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder or for ransom, etc.  
141. Importation of girl or boy from foreign country.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
8 
 SECTIONS  
142. Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped or abducted person.  
143. Trafficking of person.  
144. Exploitation of a trafficked person.  
145. Habitual dealing in slaves.  
146. Unlawful compulsory labour.  
CHAPTER VII  
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE  STATE  
147. Waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of war, against Government of 
India.  
148. Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by section 147.  
149. Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against Government of India.  
150. Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war.  
151. Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent to compel or restrain exercise of any lawful 
power.  
152. Act endangering sovereignty, unity and integrity of India.  
153. Waging war against Government of any foreign State at peace with Government of India.  
154. Committing depredation on territories of foreign State at peace with Government of India.  
155. Receiving property taken by war or depredation mentioned in sections 153 and 154.  
156. Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of State or war to escape.  
157. Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to escape.  
158. Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring such prisoner.  
CHAPTER VIII  
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE  
159. Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier, sailor or airman from his duty.  
160. Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence thereof.  
161. Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his superior officer, when in execution of 
his office.  
162. Abetment of such assault, if assault committed.  
163. Abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or airman.  
164. Harbouring deserter.  
165. Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through negligence of master.  
166. Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or airman.  
167. Persons subject to certain Acts.  
168. Wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier, sailor or airman.  
CHAPTER IX  
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS  
169. Candidate, electoral right defined.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
9 
 SECTIONS  
170. Bribery.  
171. Undue influence at elections.  
172. Personation at elections.  
173. Punishment for bribery.  
174. Punishment for undue influence or personation at an election.  
175. False statement in connection with an election.  
176. Illegal payments in connection with an election.  
177. Failure to keep election accounts.  
CHAPTER X  
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN, CURRENCY -NOTES, BANK -NOTES, AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS  
178. Counterfeiting coin, Government stamps, currency -notes or bank -notes.  
179. Using as  genuine, forged  or counterfeit  coin,  Government  stamp,  currency -notes  or                
bank -notes.  
180. Possession of forged or counterfeit coin, Government stamp, currency -notes or bank -notes.  
181. Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging or counterfeiting coin, 
Government stamp, currency -notes or bank -notes.  
182. Making or using documents resembling currency -notes or bank -notes.  
183. Effacing writing from substance bearing Government stamp, or removing from document a 
stamp used for it, with intent to cause loss to Government.  
184. Using Government stamp known to have been before used.  
185. Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used.  
186. Prohibition of fictitious stamps.  
187. Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different weight or composition from that 
fixed by law.  
188. Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint.  
CHAPTER XI  
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY  
189. Unlawful assembly.  
190. Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in prosecution of common 
object.  
191. Rioting.  
192. Wantonly giving provocation with intent to cause riot -if rioting be committed; if not 
committed.  
193. Liability of owner, occupier, etc., of land on which an unlawful assembly or riot takes place.  
194. Affray.  
195. Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing riot, etc.  
196. Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, 
residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
10 
 SECTIONS  
197. Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national integration.  
CHAPTER XII  
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS  
198. Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury to any person.  
199. Public servant disobeying direction under law.  
200. Punishment for non -treatment of victim.  
201. Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to cause injury.  
202. Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade.  
203. Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property.  
204. Personating a public servant.  
205. Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant with fraudulent intent.  
CHAPTER XIII  
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS  
206. Absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceeding.  
207. Preventing service of summons or other proceeding,  or preventing publication thereof.  
208. Non -attendance in obedience to an order from public servant.  
209. Non -appearance in response to a proclamation under section 84 of Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.  
210. Omission to produce document or electronic record to public servant by person legally 
bound to produce it.  
211. Omission to give notice or information to public servant by person legally bound to give it.  
212. Furnishing false information.  
213. Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public servant to make it.  
214. Refusing to answer public servant authorised to question.  
215. Refusing to sign statement.  
216. False statement on oath or affirmation to public servant or person authorised  to administer 
an oath or affirmation.  
217. False information, with intent to cause public servant to use his lawful power to injury of 
another person.  
218. Resistance to taking of property by lawful authority of a public servant.  
219. Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by authority of public servant.  
220. Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by authority of public servant.  
221. Obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions.  
222. Omission to assist public servant when bound by law to give assistance.  
223. Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant.  
224. Threat of injury to public servant.  
225. Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying for protection to public servant.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
11 
 SECTIONS  
226. Attempt to commit suicide to compel or restrain exercise of lawful power.  
CHAPTER XIV  
OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE  
227. Giving false evidence.  
228. Fabricating false evidence.  
229. Punishment for false evidence.  
230. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of capital offence.  
231. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of offence punishable 
with imprisonment for life or imprisonment.  
232. Threatening any person to give false evidence.  
233. Using evidence known to be false.  
234. Issuing or signing false certificate.  
235. Using as true a certificate known to be false.  
236. False statement made in declaration which is by law receivable as evidence.  
237. Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false.  
238. Causing disappearance of evidence of offence,  or giving false information to screen 
offender.  
239. Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to inform.  
240. Giving false information respecting an offence committed.  
241. Destruction of document or electronic record to prevent its production as evidence.  
242. False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or prosecution.  
243. Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in 
execution.  
244. Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution.  
245. Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due.  
246. Dishonestly making false claim in Court.  
247. Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due.  
248. False charge of offence made with intent to injure.  
249. Harbouring offender.  
250. Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment.  
251. Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of screening offender.  
252. Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc.  
253. Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose apprehension has been 
ordered.  
254. Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits.  
255. Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person from punishment or 
property from forfeiture.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
12 
 SECTIONS  
256. Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with intent to save person from 
punishment or property from forfeiture.  
257. Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making report, etc., contrary to law.  
258. Commitment for trial or confinement by person having authority who knows that he is 
acting contrary to law.  
259. Intentional omission to apprehend on part of public servant bound to apprehend.  
260. Intentional omission to apprehend on part of public servant bound to apprehend person 
under sentence or lawfully committed.  
261. Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by public servant.  
262. Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful apprehension.  
263. Resistance or  obstruction to  lawful  apprehension  of another  person.  
264. Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on part of public servant, in cases not 
otherwise provided for.  
265. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension or escape or rescue in cases not otherwise 
provided for.  
266. Violation of condition of remission of punishment.  
267. Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in judicial proceeding.  
268. Personation of assessor.  
269. Failure by person released on bail bond or bond to appear in Court.  
CHAPTER XV  
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE,  
DECENCY AND  MORALS  
270. Public nuisance.  
271. Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life.  
272. Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life.  
273. Disobedience to quarantine rule.  
274. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale.  
275. Sale of noxious food or drink.  
276. Adulteration of drugs.  
277. Sale of adulterated drugs.  
278. Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation.  
279. Fouling water of public spring or reservoir.  
280. Making atmosphere noxious to health.  
281. Rash driving or riding on a public way.  
282. Rash navigation of vessel.  
283. Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy.  
284. Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded vessel.  
285. Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
13 
 SECTIONS  
286. Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance.  
287. Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter.  
288. Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance.  
289. Negligent conduct with respect to machinery.  
290. Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down, repairing or constructing buildings, etc.  
291. Negligent conduct with respect to animal.  
292. Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise provided for.  
293. Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue.  
294. Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.  
295. Sale, etc., of obscene objects to child.  
296. Obscene acts and songs.  
297. Keeping lottery office.  
CHAPTER XVI  
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION  
298. Injuring or defiling place of worship with intent to insult religion of any class.  
299. Deliberate and  malicious acts,  intended to  outrage  religious  feelings of any  class by  
insulting its  religion or  religious  beliefs.  
300. Disturbing religious assembly.  
301. Trespassing on burial places, etc.  
302. Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound religious feelings of any person.  
CHAPTER XVII  
OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY  
Of theft  
303. Theft.  
304. Snatching.  
305. Theft in a dwelling house, or means of transportation or place of worship, etc.  
306. Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master.  
307. Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in order to committing of 
theft.  
Of extortion  
308. Extortion.  
Of robbery and dacoity  
309. Robbery.  
310. Dacoity.  
311. Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt.  
312. Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly weapon.  
313. Punishment for belonging to gang of robbers, etc.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
14 
  
Of criminal misappropriation of property  
SECTIONS  
314. Dishonest misappropriation of property.  
315. Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at the time of his 
death.  
Of criminal breach of trust  
316. Criminal breach of trust.  
Of receiving stolen property  
 
317. Stolen property.  
Of cheating  
318. Cheating.  
319. Cheating by personation.  
Of fraudulent deeds and dispositions of property  
320. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent distribution among 
creditors.  
321. Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for creditors.  
322. Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false statement of 
consideration.  
323. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property.  
Of mischief  
324. Mischief.  
325. Mischief by killing or maiming animal.  
326. Mischief by injury, inundation, fire or explosive substance, etc.  
327. Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a rail, aircraft, decked vessel or one of 
twenty tons burden.  
328. Punishment for intentionally running vessel aground or ashore with intent to commit theft, 
etc. 
Of criminal trespass  
329. Criminal trespass and house -trespass.  
330. House -trespass and hous -ebreaking.  
331. Punishment for house -trespass or house -breaking.  
332. House -trespass in order to commit offence.  
333. House -trespass after preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint.  
334. Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO PROPERTY MARKS  
335. Making a false  document.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
15 
 SECTIONS  
336. Forgery.  
337. Forgery of record of Court or of public register, etc.  
338. Forgery of valuable security, will, etc.  
339. Having possession of document described in section 337 or section 338, knowing it to be 
forged and intending to use it as genuine.  
340. Forged document or electronic record and using it as genuine.  
341. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit forgery punishable under 
section 338.  
342. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents described in section 338, 
or possessing counterfeit marked material.  
343. Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will, authority to adopt, or valuable security.  
344. Falsification of accounts.  
Of property marks  
345. Property mark.  
346. Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury.  
347. Counterfeiting a property mark.  
348. Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property mark.  
349. Selling goods  marked with a  counterfeit  property  mark.  
350. Making a false  mark upon  any receptacle  containing  goods.  
CHAPTER XIX  
OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT, ANNOYANCE, DEFAMATION, ETC.  
351. Criminal intimidation.  
352. Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of peace.  
353. Statements conducing to public mischief.  
354. Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be rendered an object of Divine 
displeasure.  
355. Misconduct in public by a drunken person.  
Of defamation  
356. Defamation.  
Of breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person  
357. Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person.  
CHAPTER XX  
REPEAL AND SAVINGS  
358. Repeal and savings.  
  
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
16 
 THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023  
ACT NO. 45 OF 2023  
 [25th December , 2023.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the provisions relating to offences and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: –– 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, commencement and application. ––(1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification  in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions  of this Sanhita.  
(3) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Sanhita and not otherwise for every act or 
omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within India.  
(4) Any person liable, by any law for the time being in force in India, to be tried for an offence 
committed beyond India shall be dealt with according to the provisions of this Sanhita for any act 
committed beyond India in the same manner as if such act had been committed within India.  
(5) The provisions of this Sanhita shall also apply to any offence committed by — 
(a) any citizen of India in any place without and beyond India;  
(b) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be;  
(c) any person in any place without and beyond India committing offence targeting a computer 
resource located in India.  
Explanation. —In this section, the word “offence ” includes every act committed outside India which, 
if committed in India, would be punishable under this Sanhita.  
Illustration.  
A, who is a citizen of India, commits a murder in any place without and beyond India.  
He can be tried and convicted of murder in any place in India in which he may be found.  
(6) Nothing in this Sanhita shall affect the provisions of any Act for punishing mutiny and desertion 
of officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen in the service of the Government of India or the provisions of any 
special or local law.  
2. Definitions . –– In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires, –– 
(1) “act” denotes as well a series of acts as a single act;  
(2) “animal ” means any living creature, other than a human being;  
(3) “child ” means any person below the age of eighteen years;  
(4) “counterfeit ”.––A person is said to “counterfeit ” who causes one thing to resemble another 
thing, intending by means of that resemblance to practise deception, or knowing it to be likely that 
deception will thereby be practised.  
 
Explanation 1.—It is not essential to counterfeiting that the imitation should be exact.  
 
1. 1st day of July, 2024, except the provision of sub -section ( 2) of section 106, vide notification No. S.O. 850( E), dated, 23rd  
February, 2024, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 

--- PAGE 17 ---
17 
 Explanation 2.—When a person causes one thing to resemble another thing, and the resemblance 
is such that a person might be deceived thereby, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, 
that the person so causing the one thing to resemble the other thing intended by means of that 
resemblance to practise deception or knew it to be likely that deception would thereby be practised;  
(5) “Court ” means a Judge who is empowered by law to act judicially alone, or a  body of Judges 
which is empowered by law to act judicially as a body, when such  Judge or body of Judges is acting 
judicially;   
(6) “death ” means the death of a human being unless the contrary appears from  the context;  
(7) “dishonestly ” means doing anything with the intention of causing wrongful  gain to one 
person or wrongful loss to another person;  
(8) “document ” means any matter expressed or described upon any substance  by means of letters, 
figures or marks, or by more than one of those means, and includes  electronic and digital record, 
intended to be used, or which may be used, as evidence  of that matter.  
Explanation 1.—It is immaterial by what means or upon what substance the  letters, figures or 
marks are formed, or whether the evidence is intended for, or may be  used in a Court or not.  
(a) A writing expressing the terms of a contract, which may be used as evidence of the contract, 
is a document.  
(b) A cheque upon a banker is a document.  
(c) A power -of-attorney is a document.  
(d) A map or plan which is intended to be used or which may be used as evidence, is a document.  
(e) A writing containing directions or instructions is a document.  
Explanation 2.—Whatever is expressed by means of letters, figures or marks as explained by 
mercantile or other usage, shall be deemed to be expressed by such letters, figures or marks within 
the meaning of this section, although the same may not be actually expressed.  
Illustration.  
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange payable to his order. The meaning of the 
endorsement, as explained by mercantile usage, is that the bill is to be paid to the holder. The 
endorsement is a document, and shall be construed in the same manner as if the words “pay to the 
holder ” or words to that effect had been written over the signature;  
(9) “fraudulently ” means doing anything with the intention to defraud but not otherwise;  
(10) “gender ”.—The pronoun “he” and its derivatives are used of any person, whether male, 
female or transgender.  
Explanation .–– “transgender ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( k) of section 2 of 
the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 (40 of 2019);  
(11) “good faith ”.—Nothing is said to be done or believed in “good faith ” which is done or 
believed without due care and attention;  
(12) “Government ” means the Central Government or a State Government;  
(13) “harbour ” includes supplying a person with shelter, food, drink, money, clothes, arms, 
ammunition or means of conveyance, or the assisting a person by any means, whether of the same 
kind as those enumerated in this clause or not, to evade apprehension;  
(14) “injury ” means any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in body, mind, reputation 
or property;  
(15) “illegal ” and “legally bound to do ”.—The word “illegal ” is applicable to everything which is 
an offence or which is prohibited by law, or which furnishes ground for a civil action; and a person is 
said to be “legally bound to do ” whatever it is illegal in him to omit;  

--- PAGE 18 ---
18 
 (16) “Judge ” means a person who is officially designated as a Judge and includes a person, –– 
(i) who is empowered by law to give, in any legal proceeding, civil or criminal, a 
definitive judgment, or a judgment which, if not appealed against, would be definitive, or a 
judgment which, if confirmed by some other authority, would be definitive; or  
(ii) who is one of a body or persons, which body of persons is empowered by law to give 
such a judgment.  
Illustration.  
A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on which he has power to sentence to 
fine or imprisonment, with or without appeal, is a Judge;  
(17) “life” means the life of a human being, unless the contrary appears from the context;  
(18) “local law ” means a law applicable only to a particular part of India;  
(19) “man” means male human being of any age;  
(20) “month ” and “year”.––Wherever the word “month ” or the word “year” is used, it is to be 
understood that the month or the year is to be reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar;  
(21) “movable property ” includes property of every description, except land and things attached 
to the earth or permanently fastened to anything which is attached to the earth;  
(22) “number ”.—Unless the contrary appears from the context, words importing the singular 
number include the plural number, and words importing the plural number include the singular 
number;  
(23) “oath” includes a solemn affirmation substituted by law for an oath, and any declaration 
required or authorised by law to be made before a public servant or to be used for the purpose of 
proof, whether in a Court or not;  
(24) “offence ”.—Except in the Chapters and sections mentioned in sub -clauses ( a) and ( b), the 
word “offence ” means a thing made punishable by this Sanhita, but –– 
(a) in Chapter III and in the following sections, namely, sub -sections (2),  (3), (4) and (5) of 
section 8, sections 9, 49, 50, 52, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 119,  120, 123, sub -sections (7) and 
(8) of section 127, 222, 230, 231, 240, 248, 250,  251, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, sub -sections (6) 
and (7) of section 308 and  sub-section (2) of section 330, the word “offence ” means a thing 
punishable  under this Sanhita, or under any special law or local law; and  
(b) in sub -section ( 1) of section 189, sections 211, 212, 238, 239, 249, 253  and                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 329, the word “offence ” shall have the same  meaning when the act 
punishable under the special law or local law is punishable  under such law with imprisonment for 
a term of six months or more, whether  with or without fine;  
(25) “omission ” denotes as well as a series of omissions as a single omission;  
(26) “person ” includes any company or association or body of persons, whether  incorporated or 
not; 
(27) “public ” includes any class of the public or any community;  
(28) “public servant ” means a person falling under any of the descriptions,  namely: — 
(a) every commissioned officer in the Army, Navy or Air Force;  
(b) every Judge including any person empowered by law to discharge,  whether by 
himself or as a member of any body of persons, any adjudicatory  functions;  
(c) every officer of a Court including a liquidator, receiver or commissioner  whose duty 
it is, as such officer, to investigate or report on any matter of law or  fact, or to make, 
authenticate, or keep any document, or to take charge or dispose  of any property, or to 

--- PAGE 19 ---
19 
 execute any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to interpret, or to preserve order in 
the Court, and every person specially authorised by a Court to perform any of such duties;  
(d) every assessor or member of a panchayat assisting a Court or public servant;  
(e) every arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or matter has been referred for 
decision or report by any Court, or by any other competent public authority;  
(f) every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered to place or 
keep any person in confinement;  
(g) every officer of the Government whose duty it is, as such officer, to prevent offences, 
to give information of offences, to bring offenders to justice, or to protect the public health, 
safety or convenience;  
(h) every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any 
property on behalf of the Government, or to make any survey, assessment or contract on 
behalf of the Government, or to execute any revenue -process, or to investigate, or to report, 
on any matter affecting the pecuniary interests of the Government, or to make, authenticate 
or keep any document relating to the pecuniary interests of the Government, or to prevent the 
infraction of any law for the protection of the pecunia ry interests of the Government;  
(i) every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any 
property, to make any survey or assessment or to levy any rate or tax for any secular common 
purpose of any village, town or district, or to make, authenticate or keep any document for 
the ascertaining of the rights of the people of any village, town or district;  
(j) every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered to prepare, 
publish, maintain or revise an electoral roll or to conduct an election or part of an election;  
(k) every person — 
(i) in the service or pay of the Government or remunerated by fees or commission for 
the performance of any public duty by the Government;  
(ii) in the service or pay of a local authority as defined in clause ( 31) of section 3 of 
the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), a corporation established by or under a 
Central or State Act or a Government company as defined in clause ( 45) of section 2 of 
the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).  
Explanation. — 
(a) persons falling under any of the descriptions made in this clause are public servants, 
whether appointed by the Government or not;  
(b) every person who is in actual possession of the situation of a public servant, whatever 
legal defect there may be in his right to hold that situation is a public servant;  
(c) “election ” means an election for the purpose of selecting members of any legislative, 
municipal or other public authority, of whatever character, the method of selection to which 
is by, or under any law for the time being in force.  
Illustration . 
 A Municipal Commissioner is a public servant;  
(29) “reason to believe ”.—A person is said to have “reason to believe ” a thing, if he has 
sufficient cause to believe that thing but not otherwise;  
(30) “special law ” means a law applicable to a particular subject;  
(31) “valuable security ” means a document which is, or purports to be, a document whereby any 
legal right is created, extended, transferred, restricted, extinguished or released, or whereby any 
person acknowledges that he lies under legal liability, or has not a certain legal right.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
20 
 Illustration.  
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange. As the effect of this  endorsement is to 
transfer the right to the bill to any person who may become the  lawful holder of it, the endorsement is 
a “valuable security ”;  
(32) “vessel ” means anything made for the conveyance by water of human  beings or of property;  
(33) “voluntarily ”.—A person is said to cause an effect “voluntarily ” when he  causes it by means 
whereby he intended to cause it, or by means which, at the time of  employing those means, he knew 
or had reason to believe to be likely to cause it.   
Illustration . 
A sets fire, by night, to an inhabited house in a large town, for the purpose of  facilitating a 
robbery and thus causes the death of a person. Here, A may not have  intended to cause death; and 
may even be sorry that death has been caused by his act;  yet, if he knew that he was likely to cause 
death, he has caused death voluntarily;  
(34) “will” means any testamentary document;  
(35) “woman ” means a female human being of any age;  
(36) “wrongful gain ” means gain by unlawful means of property to which the  person gaining is 
not legally entitled;  
(37) “wrongful loss ” means the loss by unlawful means of property to which the  person losing it 
is legally entitled;  
(38) “gaining wrongfully ” and “losing wrongfully ”.—A person is said to gain  wrongfully when 
such person retains wrongfully, as well as when such person acquires  wrongfully. A person is said to 
lose wrongfully when such person is wrongfully kept out  of any property, as well as when such 
person is wrongfully deprived of property; and  
(39) words and expressions used but not defined in this Sanhita but defined in  the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) and the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023  shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act and Sanhita.  
3. General explanations. —(1) Throughout this Sanhita every definition of an offence, every penal 
provision,  and every Illustration of every such definition or penal provision, shall be understood  subject 
to the exceptions contained in the Chapter entitled “General Exceptions ”, though  those exceptions are not 
repeated in such definition, penal provision, or Illustration . 
Illustration s. 
(a) The sections in this Sanhita, which contain definitions of offences, do not express  that a child 
under seven years of age cannot commit such offences; but the definitions are to  be understood subject to 
the general exception which provides that nothing shall be an  offence which is done by a child under 
seven years of age.  
(b) A, a police officer, without warrant, apprehends Z, who has committed murder. Here  A is not 
guilty of the offence of wrongful confinement; for he was bound by law to apprehend  Z, and therefore the 
case falls within the general exception which provides that “nothing is  an offence which is done by a 
person who is bound by law to do it ”. 
(2) Every expression which is explained in any Part of this Sanhita, is used in every Part of this 
Sanhita in conformity with the explanation.  
(3) When property is in the possession of a person’s spouse, clerk or servant, on account of that 
person, it is in that person’s possession within the meaning of this Sanhita.  
Explanation. —A person employed temporarily or on a particular occasion in the capacity of a clerk 
or servant, is a clerk or servant within the meaning of this sub -section.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
21 
 (4) In every Part of this Sanhita, except where a contrary intention appears from the context, words 
which refer to acts done extend also to illegal omissions.  
(5) When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, 
each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone.  
(6) Whenever an act, which is criminal only by reason of its being done with a criminal knowledge or 
intention, is done by several persons, each of such persons who joins in the act with such knowledge or 
intention is liable for the act in the same manner as if the act were done by him alone with that knowledge 
or intention.  
(7) Wherever the causing of a certain effect, or an attempt to cause that effect, by an act or by an 
omission, is an offence, it is to be understood that the causing of that effect partly by an act and partly by 
an omission is the same offence.  
Illustration . 
A intentionally causes Z’s death, partly by illegally omitting to give Z food, and partly by beating Z. 
A has committed murder.  
(8) When an offence is committed by means of several acts, whoever intentionally cooperates in the 
commission of that offence by doing any one of those acts, either singly or jointly with any other person, 
commits that offence.  
Illustration s. 
(a) A and B agree to murder Z by severally and at different times giving him small doses of poison. 
A and B administer the poison according to the agreement with intent to murder Z. Z dies from the 
effects the several doses of poison so administered to him. Here A and B intentionally cooperate in the 
commission of murder and as each of them does an act by which the death is caused, they are both guilty 
of the offence though their acts are separate.  
(b) A and B are joint jailors, and as such have the charge of Z, a prisoner, alternatively for six hours 
at a time. A and B, intending to cause Z’s death, knowingly cooperate in causing that effect by illegally 
omitting, each during the time of his attendance, to furnish Z with food supplied to them for that purpose. 
Z dies of hunger. Both A and B are guilty of the murder of Z.  
(c) A, a jailor, has the charge of Z, a prisoner. A, intending to cause Z’s death, illegally omits to 
supply Z with food; in consequence of which Z is much reduced in strength, but the starvation is not 
sufficient to cause his death. A is dismissed from his office, and B succeeds him. B, without collusion or 
cooperation with A, illegally omits to supply Z with food, knowing that he is likely thereby to cause Z’s 
death. Z dies of hunger. B is guilty of murder, but, as A did not cooperate with B. A is guilty only of an 
attempt to commit murder.  
(9) Where several persons are engaged or concerned in the commission of a criminal act, they may be 
guilty of different offences by means of that act.  
Illustration . 
A attacks Z under such circumstances of grave provocation that his killing of Z would be only 
culpable homicide not amounting to murder. B, having ill -will towards Z and intending to kill him, and 
not having been subject to the provocation, assists A in killing Z. Here, though A and B are both engaged 
in causing Z’s death, B is guilty of murder, and A is guilty only of culpable homicide.  
CHAPTER II  
OF PUNISHMENTS  
4. Punishments.  —The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this 
Sanhita are — 
(a) Death;  
(b) Imprisonment for life;  

--- PAGE 22 ---
22 
 (c) Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely: — 
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour;  
(2) Simple;  
(d) Forfeiture of property;  
(e) Fine;  
(f) Community Service.  
5. Commutation of sentence. —The appropriate Government may, without the consent of the 
offender, commute any punishment under this Sanhita to any other punishment in accordance 
with section 474  of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section the expression “appropriate Government ” means,  — 
(a) in cases where the sentence is a sentence of death or is for an offence against any law relating 
to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, the Central Government; and  
(b) in cases where the sentence (whether of death or not) is for an offence against any law 
relating to a matter to which the executive power of the State extends, the Government of the State 
within which the offender is sentenced.  
6. Fractions of terms of punishment .—In calculating fractions of terms of punishment, 
imprisonment for life shall be reckoned as equivalent to imprisonment for twenty years unless otherwise 
provided.  
7.  Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or partly rigorous or simple .—In 
every case in which an offender is punishable with imprisonment which may be of either description, it 
shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to direct in the sentence that such 
imprisonment shall be wholly rigorous, or that such imprisonment shall be wholly simple, or that any part 
of such imprisonment shall be rigorous and the rest simple.  
8. Amount of fine, liability in default of payment of fine, etc .—(1) Where no sum is expressed to 
which a fine may extend, the amount of fine to which the offender is liable is unlimited, but shall not be 
excessive.  
(2) In every case of an offence — 
(a) punishable with imprisonment as well as fine, in which the offender is sentenced to a fine, 
whether with or without imprisonment;  
(b) punishable with imprisonment or fine, or with fine only, in which the offender is sentenced to 
a fine,  
it shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to direct by the sentence that, in default 
of payment of the fine, the offender shall suffer imprisonment for a certain term, in which imprisonment 
shall be in excess of any other imprisonment to which he may have been sentenced or to which he may be 
liable under a commutation of a sentence.  
(3) The term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned in default of payment of a fine 
shall not exceed one -fourth of the term of imprisonment which is the maximum fixed for the offence, if 
the offence be punishable with imprisonment as well as fine.  
(4) The imprisonment which the Court imposes in default of payment of a fine or in default of 
community service may be of any description to which the offender might have been sentenced for the 
offence.  
(5) If the offence is punishable with fine or community service, the imprisonment which the Court 
imposes in default of payment of the fine or in default of community service shall be simple, and the term 
for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned, in default of payment of fine or in default of 
community service, shall not exceed, — 
 
(a) two months when the amount of the fine does not exceed five thousand rupees;  

--- PAGE 23 ---
23 
 (b) four months when the amount of the fine does not exceed ten thousand rupees; and  
(c) one year in any other case.  
(6) (a) The imprisonment which is imposed in default of payment of a fine shall terminate whenever 
that fine is either paid or levied by process of law;  
(b) If, before the expiration of the term of imprisonment fixed in default of payment, such a 
proportion of the fine be paid or levied that the term of imprisonment suffered in default of payment is 
not less than proportional to the part of the fine still unpaid, the imprisonment shall terminate.  
Illustration . 
A is sentenced to a fine of one thousand rupees and to four months’ imprisonment in default of 
payment. Here, if seven hundred and fifty rupees of the fine be paid or levied before the expiration of one 
month of the imprisonment, A will be discharged as soon as the first month has expired. If seven hundred 
and fifty rupees be paid or levied at the time of the expiration of the first month, or at any later time while 
A continues in imprisonment, A will be immediately discharged. If five hundred rupees of the  fine be 
paid or levied before the expiration of two months of the imprisonment, A will be discharged as soon as 
the two months are completed. If five hundred rupees be paid or levied at the time of the expiration of 
those two months, or at any later time while A continues in imprisonment, A will be immediately 
discharged.  
(7) The fine, or any part thereof which remains unpaid, may be levied at any time within six years 
after the passing of the sentence, and if, under the sentence, the offender be liable to imprisonment for a 
longer period than six years, then at any time previous to the expiration of that period; and the death of 
the offender does not discharge from the liability any property which would, after his death, be legally 
liable for his debts.  
9. Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences .—(1) Where anything which is an 
offence is made up of parts, any of which parts is itself an offence, the offender shall not be punished 
with the punishment of more than one of such his offences, unless it be so expressly provided.  
(2) Where — 
(a) anything is an offence falling within two or more separate definitions of any law in force for 
the time being by which offences are defined or punished; or  
(b) several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves constitute an 
offence, constitute, when combined, a different offence,  
the offender shall not be punished with a more severe punishment than the Court which tries him could 
award for any one of such offences.  
Illustrations . 
(a) A gives Z fifty strokes with a stick. Here A may have committed the offence of voluntarily 
causing hurt to Z by the whole beating, and also by each of the blows which make up the whole beating. 
If A were liable to punishment for every blow, he might be imprisoned for fifty years, one for each blow. 
But he is liable only to one punishment for the whole beating.  
(b) But, if, while A is beating Z, Y interferes, and A intentionally strikes Y, here, as the blow given to 
Y is no part of the act whereby A voluntarily causes hurt to Z, A is liable to one punishment for 
voluntarily causing hurt to Z, and to another for the blow given to Y.  
10. Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, judgment stating that it is doubtful 
of which .—In all cases in which judgment is given that a person is guilty of one of several offences 
specified in the judgment, but that it is doubtful of which of these offences he is guilty, the offender shall 
be punished for the offence for which the lowest punishment is provided if the same punishment is not 
provided for all.  
11. Solitary confinement .—Whenever any person is convicted of an offence for which under this 
Sanhita the Court has power to sentence him to rigorous imprisonment, the Court may, by its sentence, 

--- PAGE 24 ---
24 
 order that the offender shall be kept in solitary confinement for any portion or portions of the 
imprisonment to which he is sentenced, not exceeding three months in the whole, according to the 
following scale, namely:  — 
(a) a time not exceeding one month if the term of imprisonment shall not exceed six months;  
(b) a time not exceeding two months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed six months and 
shall not exceed one year;  
(c) a time not exceeding three months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed one year.  
12. Limit of solitary confinement .—In executing a sentence of solitary confinement, such 
confinement shall in no case exceed fourteen days at a time, with intervals between the periods of solitary 
confinement of not less duration than such periods; and when the imprisonment awarded shall exceed 
three months, the solitary confinement shall not exceed seven days in any one month of the whole 
imprisonment awarded, with intervals between the periods of solitary confinement of not less duration 
than such periods . 
13. Enhanced punishment for certain offences after previous conviction .—Whoever, having been 
convicted by a Court in India, of an offence punishable under Chapter X or Chapter XVII of this Sanhita 
with imprisonment of either description for a term of three years or upwards, shall be guilty of any 
offence punishable under either of those Chapters with like imprisonment for the like term, shall be 
subject for every such subsequent offence to imprisonment for life, or to imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to ten years.  
 
CHAPTER III  
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS  
14. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bound, by law .—
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by 
reason of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be, bound by law to do it.  
Illustrations . 
(a) A, a soldier, fires on a mob by the order of his superior officer, in conformity with the 
commands of the law. A has committed no offence.  
(b) A, an officer of a Court, being ordered by that Court to arrest Y, and, after due enquiry, 
believing Z to be Y, arrests Z. A has committed no offence.  
15. Act of Judge when acting judicially .—Nothing is an offence which is done by a Judge when 
acting judicially in the exercise of any power which is, or which in good faith he believes to be, given to 
him by law.  
16. Act done pursuant to judgment or order of Court .—Nothing which is done in pursuance of, or 
which is warranted by the judgment or order of, a Court; if done whilst such judgment or order remains in 
force, is an offence, notwithstanding the Court may have had no jurisdiction to pass such judgment or 
order, provided the person doing the act in good faith believes that the Court had such jurisdiction.  
17. Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing himself justified, by law .—
Nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by law, or who by reason of a mistake 
of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith, believes himself to be justified by law, in 
doing it.  
 
 
 
Illustration . 

--- PAGE 25 ---
25 
 A sees Z commit what appears to A to be a murder. A, in the exercise, to the best of his judgment 
exerted in good faith, of the power which the law gives to all persons of apprehending murderers in the 
fact, seizes Z, in order to bring Z before the proper authorities. A has committed no offence, though it 
may turn out that Z was acting in self -defence.  
18. Accident in doing a lawful act .—Nothing is an offence which is done by accident or misfortune, 
and without any criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful manner by lawful 
means and with proper care and caution.  
Illustration . 
A is at work with a hatchet; the head flies off and kills a man who is standing by. Here, if there was 
no want of proper caution on the part of A, his act is excusable and not an offence.  
19. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to prevent other harm .—
Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause 
harm, if it be done without any criminal intention to cause harm, and in good faith for the purpose of 
preventing or avoiding other harm to person or property.  
Explanation .—It is a question of fact in such a case whether the harm to be prevented or avoided was 
of such a nature and so imminent as to justify or excuse the risk of doing the act with the knowledge that 
it was likely to cause harm.  
Illustrations . 
(a) A, the captain of a vessel, suddenly and without any fault or negligence on his part, finds himself 
in such a position that, before he can stop his vessel, he must inevitably run down a boat B, with twenty 
or thirty passengers on board, unless he changes the course of his vessel, and that, by changing his 
course, he must incur risk of running down a boat C with only two passengers on board, which he may 
possibly clear. Here, if A alters his course without any intention to run down the boat C and in good  faith 
for the purpose of avoiding the danger to the passengers in the boat B, he is not guilty of an offence, 
though he may run down the boat C by doing an act which he knew was likely to cause that effect, if it be 
found as a matter of fact that the danger which he intended to avoid was such as to excuse him in 
incurring the risk of running down the boat C.  
(b) A, in a great fire, pulls down houses in order to prevent the conflagration from spreading. He does 
this with the intention in good faith of saving human life or property. Here, if it be found that the harm to 
be prevented was of such a nature and so imminent as to excuse A’s act, A is not guilty of the offence.  
20. Act of a child under seven years of age .—Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under 
seven years of age.  
21. Act of a child above seven and under twelve years of age of immature understanding .—
Nothing is an offence which is done by a child above seven years of age and under twelve years of age, 
who has not attained sufficient maturity of understanding to judge of the nature and consequences of his 
conduct on that occasion.  
22. Act of a person of unsound mind .—Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the 
time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that 
he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.  
23. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his will .—
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, is, by reason of intoxication, 
incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong, or contrary to law; 
provided that the thing which intoxicated him was administered to him without his knowledge or against 
his will.  
24. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed by one who is intoxicated .—
In cases where an act done is not an offence unless done with a particular knowledge or intent, a person 
who does the act in a state of intoxication shall be liable to be dealt with as if he had the same knowledge 
as he would have had if he had not been intoxicated, unless the thing which intoxicated him was 
administered to him without his knowledge or against his will.  

--- PAGE 26 ---
26 
 25. Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, done by 
consent .—Nothing which is not intended to cause death, or grievous hurt, and which is not known by the 
doer to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, 
or be intended by the doer to cause, to any person, above eighteen years of age, who has given consent, 
whether express or implied, to suffer that harm; or by reason of any harm which it may be known by the 
doer t o be likely to cause to any such person who has consented to take the risk of that harm.  
Illustration . 
A and Z agree to fence with each other for amusement. This agreement implies the consent of each to 
suffer any harm which, in the course of such fencing, may be caused without foul play; and if A, while 
playing fairly, hurts Z, A commits no offence.  
26. Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for person’s benefit .—
Nothing, which is not intended to cause death, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or 
be intended by the doer to cause, or be known by the doer to be likely to cause, to any person for whose 
benefit it is done in good faith, and who has given a consent, whether express or implied, to suffer that 
harm, or to take the risk of that harm.  
Illustration . 
A, a surgeon, knowing that a particular operation is likely to cause the death of Z, who suffers under 
the painful complaint, but not intending to cause Z’s death, and intending, in good faith, Z’s benefit, 
performs that operation on Z, with Z’s consent. A has committed no offence.  
27. Act done in good faith for benefit of child or person of unsound mind, by, or by consent of 
guardian .—Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under twelve years of age, or 
person of unsound mind, by, or by consent, either express or implied, of the guardian or other person 
having lawful charge of that person, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or be 
intended by the doer to cause or be known by the doer to be likely to cause to that person:  
Provided that this exception shall not extend to — 
(a) the intentional causing of death, or to the attempting to cause death;  
(b) the doing of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause death, for any 
purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or 
infirmity;  
(c) the voluntary causing of grievous hurt, or to the attempting to cause grievous hurt, unless it be 
for the purpose of preventing death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or 
infirmity;  
(d) the abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it would not extend.  
Illustration . 
A, in good faith, for his child’s benefit without his child’s consent, has his child cut for the stone by a 
surgeon knowing it to be likely that the operation will cause the child’s death, but not intending to cause 
the child’s death. A is within the exception, in as much as his object was the cure of the child.  
28. Consent known to be given under fear or misconception .—A consent is not such a consent as 
is intended by any section of this Sanhita, — 
(a) if the consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or under a misconception of fact, and 
if the person doing the act knows, or has reason to believe, that the consent was given in consequence 
of such fear or misconception; or  
(b) if the consent is given by a person who, from unsoundness of mind, or intoxication, is unable 
to understand the nature and consequence of that to which he gives his consent; or  
(c) unless the contrary appears from the context, if the consent is given by a person who is under 
twelve years of age.  

--- PAGE 27 ---
27 
 29. Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm caused .—The exceptions in 
sections 25, 26 and 27 do not extend to acts which are offences independently of any harm which they 
may cause, or be intended to cause, or be known to be likely to cause, to the person giving the consent, or 
on whose behalf the consent is given.  
Illustration . 
Causing miscarriage (unless caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman) is 
an offence independently of any harm which it may cause or be intended to cause to the woman. 
Therefore, it is not an offence “by reason of such harm ”; and the consent of the woman or of her guardian 
to the causing of such miscarriage does not justify the act.  
30. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent .—Nothing is an offence by 
reason of any harm which it may cause to a person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, even 
without that person’s consent, if the circumstances are such that it is impossible for that person to signify 
consent, or if that person is incapable of giving consent, and has no guardian or other person in lawful 
charge of him from whom it is possible to obtain consent in time for the thing to be done with benefit:  
Provided that this exception shall not extend to — 
(a) the intentional causing of death, or the attempting to cause death;  
(b) the doing of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause death, for any 
purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or 
infirmity;  
(c) the voluntary causing of hurt, or to the attempting to cause hurt, for any purpose other than 
the preventing of death or hurt;  
(d) the abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it would not extend.  
Illustrations . 
(1) Z is thrown from his horse, and is insensible. A, a surgeon, finds that Z requires to be trepanned. 
A, not intending Z’s death, but in good faith, for Z’s benefit, performs the trepan before Z recovers his 
power of judging for himself. A has committed no offence.  
(2) Z is carried off by a tiger. A fires at the tiger knowing it to be likely that the shot may kill Z, but 
not intending to kill Z, and in good faith intending Z’s benefit. A’s bullet gives Z a mortal wound. A has 
committed no offence.  
(3) A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which is likely to prove fatal unless an operation be 
immediately performed. There is no time to apply to the child’s guardian. A performs the operation in 
spite of the entreaties of the child, intending, in good faith, the child’s benefit. A has committed no 
offence.  
(4) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child. People below hold out a blanket. A drops the 
child from the house top, knowing it to be likely that the fall may kill the child, but not intending to kill 
the child, and intending, in good faith, the child’s benefit. Here, even if the child is killed by the fall, A 
has committed no offence.  
Explanation .—Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit within the meaning of sections 26, 27 and this 
section.  
31. Communication made in good faith .—No communication made in good faith is an offence by 
reason of any harm to the person to whom it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that person.  
 
 
 
Illustration . 

--- PAGE 28 ---
28 
 A, a surgeon, in good faith, communicates to a patient his opinion that he cannot live. The patient 
dies in consequence of the shock. A has committed no offence, though he knew it to be likely that the 
communication might cause the patient’s death.  
32. Act to which a person is compelled by threats .—Except murder, and offences against the State 
punishable with death, nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is compelled to do it by 
threats, which, at the time of doing it, reasonably cause the apprehension that instant death to that person 
will otherwise be the consequence:  
Provided that the person doing the act did not of his own accord, or from a reasonable apprehension 
of harm to himself short of instant death, place himself in the situation by which he became subject to 
such constraint.  
Explanation  1.—A person who, of his own accord, or by reason of a threat of being beaten, joins a 
gang of dacoits, knowing their character, is not entitled to the benefit of this exception, on the ground of 
his having been compelled by his associates to do anything that is an offence by law.  
Explanation 2.—A person seized by a gang of dacoits, and forced, by threat of instant death, to do a 
thing which is an offence by law; for example, a smith compelled to take his tools and to force the door 
of a house for the dacoits to enter and plunder it, is entitled to the benefit of this exception.  
33. Act causing slight harm .—Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes, or that it is intended to 
cause, or that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm, if that harm is so slight that no person of 
ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm.  
Of right of private defence  
34. Things done in private defence .—Nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the 
right of private defence.  
35. Right of private defence of body and of property .—Every person has a right, subject to the 
restrictions contained in section 37, to defend — 
(a) his own body, and the body of any other person, against any offence affecting the human 
body;  
(b) the property, whether movable or immovable, of himself or of any other person, against any 
act which is an offence falling under the definition of theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass, or 
which is an attempt to commit theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass.  
36. Right of private defence against act of a person of unsound mind, etc .—When an act, which 
would otherwise be a certain offence, is not that offence, by reason of the youth, the want of maturity of 
understanding, the unsoundness of mind or the intoxication of the person doing that act, or by reason of 
any misconception on the part of that person, every person has the same right of private defence against 
that act which he would have if the act were that offence.  
Illustrations . 
(a) Z, a person of unsound mind, attempts to kill A; Z is guilty of no offence. But A has the same 
right of private defence which he would have if Z were sane.  
(b) A enters by night a house which he is legally entitled to enter. Z, in good faith, taking A for a 
house -breaker, attacks A. Here Z, by attacking A under this misconception, commits no offence. But A 
has the same right of private defence against Z, which he would have if Z were not acting under that 
misconception.  
37. Acts against which there is no right of private defence .—(1) There is no right of private 
defence,  — 
(a) against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, 
if done, or attempted to be done, by a public servant acting in good faith under colour  of his office, 
though that act, may not be strictly justifiable by law;  

--- PAGE 29 ---
29 
 (b) against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, 
if done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant acting in good faith under colour 
of his office, though that direction may not be strictly justifiable by law;  
(c) in cases in which there is time to have recourse to the protection of the public authorities.  
(2) The right of private defence in no case extends to the inflicting of more harm than it is necessary 
to inflict for the purpose of defence.  
Explanation  1.—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against an act done, or 
attempted to be done, by a public servant, as such, unless he knows or has reason to believe, that the 
person doing the act is such public servant.  
Explanation  2.—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence  against an act done, or 
attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant, unless he knows, or has reason to believe, that 
the person doing the act is acting by such direction, or unless such person states the authority under which 
he acts, or if he has authority in writing, unless he produces such authority, if demanded.  
38. When right of private defence of body extends to causing death .—The right of private 
defence of the body extends, under the restrictions specified in section 37, to the voluntary causing of 
death or of any other harm to the assailant, if the offence which occasions the exercise of the right be of 
any of the descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely: — 
(a) such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that death will otherwise be the 
consequence of such assault;  
(b) such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be 
the consequence of such assault;  
(c) an assault with the intention of committing rape;  
(d) an assault with the intention of gratifying unnatural lust;  
(e) an assault with the intention of kidnapping or abducting;  
(f) an assault with the intention of wrongfully confining a person, under circumstances which 
may reasonably cause him to apprehend that he will be unable to have recourse to the public 
authorities for his release;  
(g) an act of throwing or administering acid or an attempt to throw or administer acid which may 
reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be the consequence of such act.  
39. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death .—If the offence be not of any 
of the descriptions specified in section 38, the right of private defence of the body does not extend to the 
voluntary causing of death to the assailant, but does extend, under the restrictions specified in section 37, 
to the voluntary causing to the assailant of any harm other than death.  
40. Commencement and continuance of right of private defence of body .—The right of private 
defence of the body commences as soon as a reasonable apprehension of danger to the body arises from 
an attempt or threat to commit the offence though the offence may not have been committed; and it 
continues as long as such apprehension of danger to the body continues.  
41. When right of private defence of property extends to causing death .—The right of private 
defence  of property extends, under the restrictions specified in section 37, to the voluntary causing of 
death or of any other harm to the wrong -doer, if the offence, the committing of which, or the attempting 
to commit which, occasions the exercise of the right, be an offence of any of the descriptions hereinafter 
enumerated, namely:  — 
(a) robbery;  
(b) house -breaking after sunset and before sunrise;  
(c) mischief by fire or any explosive substance committed on any building, tent or vessel, which 
building, tent or vessel is used as a human dwelling, or as a place for the custody of property;  

--- PAGE 30 ---
30 
 (d) theft, mischief, or house -trespass, under such circumstances as may reasonably cause 
apprehension that death or grievous hurt will be the consequence, if such right of private defence is 
not exercised.  
42. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death .—If the offence, the 
committing of which, or the attempting to commit which occasions the exercise of the right of private 
defence, be theft, mischief, or criminal trespass, not of any of the descriptions specified in section 41, that 
right does not extend to the voluntary causing of death, but does extend, subject to the restrictions 
specified in section 37, to the voluntary causing to the wrong -doer of any harm other than death.  
43. Commencement and continuance of right of private defence of property .—The right of 
private defence of property, — 
(a) commences when a reasonable apprehension of danger to the property commences;  
(b) against theft continues till the offender has effected  his retreat with the property or either the 
assistance of the public authorities is obtained, or the property has been recovered;  
(c) against robbery continues as long as the offender causes or attempts to cause to any person 
death or hurt or wrongful restraint or as long as the fear of instant death or of instant hurt or of instant 
personal restraint continues;  
(d) against criminal trespass or mischief continues as long as the offender continues in the 
commission of criminal trespass or mischief;  
(e) against house -breaking after sunset and before sunrise continues as long as the house -trespass 
which has been begun by such house -breaking continues.  
44. Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is risk of harm to innocent 
person .—If in the exercise of the right of private defence against an assault which reasonably causes the 
apprehension of death, the defender be so situated that he cannot effectually exercise that right without 
risk of harm to an innocent person, his right of private defence extends to the running of that risk.  
Illustration . 
A is attacked by a mob who attempt to murder him. He cannot effectually exercise his right of private 
defence without firing on the mob, and he cannot fire without risk of harming young children who are 
mingled with the mob. A commits no offence if by so firing he harms any of the children.  
CHAPTER IV  
OF ABETMENT, CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT  
of abetment  
45. Abetment of a thing .—A person abets the doing of a thing, who — 
(a) instigates any person to do that thing; or  
(b) engages with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that 
thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the 
doing of that thing; or  
(c) intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing.  
Explanation  1.—A person who, by wilful misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment of a material 
fact which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause or procure, a thing 
to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing.  
Illustration . 
A, a public officer, is authorised by a warrant from a Court to apprehend Z. B, knowing that fact and 
also that C is not Z, wilfully represents to A that C is Z, and thereby intentionally causes A to apprehend 
C. Here B abets by instigation the apprehension of C.  

