--- PAGE 103 ---
103 
 Illustrations . 
(a) A signs his own name to a bill of exchange, intending that it may be believed that the bill was 
drawn by another person of the same name. A has committed forgery.  
(b) A writes the word “accepted ” on a piece of paper and signs it with Z’s name, in order that B may 
afterwards write on the paper a bill of exchange drawn by B upon Z, and negotiate the bill as though it 
had been accepted by Z. A is guilty of forgery; and if B, knowing the fact, draws the bill upon the paper 
pursuant to A’s intention, B is also guilty of forgery.  
(c) A picks up a bill of exchange payable to the order of a different person of the same name. A 
endorses the bill in his own name, intending to cause it to be believed that it was endorsed by the person 
to whose order it was payable; here A has committed forgery.  
(d) A purchases an estate sold under execution of a decree against B. B, after the seizure of the estate, 
in collusion with Z, executes a lease of the estate, to Z at a nominal rent and for a long period and dates 
the lease six months prior to the seizure, with intent to defraud A, and to cause it to be believed that the 
lease was granted before the seizure. B, though he executes the lease in his own name, commits forgery 
by antedating it.  
(e) A, a trader, in anticipation of insolvency, lodges effects with B for A’s benefit, and with intent to 
defraud his creditors; and in order to give a colour to the transaction, writes a promissory note binding 
himself to pay to B a sum for value received, and antedates the note, intending that it may be believed to 
have been made before A was on the point of insolvency. A has committed forgery under the first head of 
the definition.  
Explanation  2.—The making of a false document in the name of a fictitious person, intending it to be 
believed that the document was made by a real person, or in the name of a deceased person, intending it 
to be believed that the document was made by the person in his lifetime, may amount to forgery.  
Illustration . 
A draws a bill of exchange upon a fictitious person, and fraudulently accepts the bill in the name of 
such fictitious person with intent to negotiate it. A commits forgery.  
Explanation  3.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “affixing electronic signature ” shall 
have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2  of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).  
336. Forgery .—(1) Whoever makes any false document or false electronic record or part of a 
document or electronic record, with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to any person, or to 
support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, or to enter into any express or 
implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed, commits forgery.  
(2) Whoever commits forgery shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.  
(3) Whoever commits forgery, intending that the document or electronic record forged shall be used 
for the purpose of cheating, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
(4) Whoever commits forgery, intending that the document or electronic record forged shall harm the 
reputation of any party, or knowing that it is likely to be used for that purpose, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
337. Forgery of record of Court or of public register, etc .—Whoever forges a document or an 
electronic record, purporting to be a record or proceeding of or in a Court or an identity document issued 
by Government including voter identity card or Aadhaar Card, or a register of birth, marriage or burial, or 
a register kept by a public servant as such, or a certificate or document purporting to be made by a public 
servant in his official capacity, or an authority to institute or defend a suit, or to take any p roceedings 

--- PAGE 104 ---
104 
 therein, or to confess judgment, or a power of attorney, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “register ” includes any list, data or record of any 
entries maintained in the electronic form as defined in clause ( r) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2  of the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).  
338. Forgery of valuable security, will, etc .—Whoever forges a document which purports to be a 
valuable security or a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or which purports to give authority to any 
person to make or transfer any valuable security, or to receive the principal, interest or dividends thereon, 
or to receive or deliver any money, movable property, or valuable security, or any document purporting 
to be an acquittance or receipt acknowledging the payment of money, or an acquittance or receipt for  the 
delivery of any movable property or valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable 
to fine.  
339. Having possession of document described in section 337 or section 338, knowing it to be 
forged and intending to use it as genuine .—Whoever has in his possession any document or electronic 
record, knowing the same to be forged and intending that the same shall fraudulently or dishonestly be 
used as genuine, shall, if the document or electronic record is one of the description mentioned in section 
337 of this Sanhita, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the document is one of the description mentioned in 
section 338, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description, for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
340. Forged document or electronic record and using it as genuine .—(1) A false document or 
electronic record made wholly or in part by forgery is designated a forged document or electronic record.  
(2) Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses as genuine any document or electronic record which he 
knows or has reason to believe to be a forged document or electronic record, shall be punished in the 
same manner as if he had forged such document or electronic record.  
341. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit forgery punishable under 
section 338 .—(1) Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an 
impression, intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing any forgery which would 
be punishable under section 338 of this Sanhita, or, with such intent, has in his possession any such seal, 
plate or other instrument, knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment for 
life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall 
also be liable to fine.  
(2) Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an impression, 
intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing any forgery which would be 
punishable under any section of this Chapter other than section 338, or, with such intent, has in his 
possession any such seal, plate or other instrument, knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
(3) Whoever possesses any seal, plate or other instrument knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and 
shall also be liable to fine.  
(4) Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses as genuine any seal, plate or other instrument knowing 
or having reason to believe the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished in the same manner as if he had 
made or counterfeited such seal, plate or other instrument.  
342. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents described in section 338, 
or possessing counterfeit marked material .—(1) Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the substance of, 
any material, any device or mark used for the purpose of authenticating any document described in 
section 338, intending that such device or mark shall be used for the purpose of giving the appearance of 
authenticity to any document then forged or thereafter to be forged on such material, or who, with such 

--- PAGE 105 ---
105 
 intent, has in his possession any material upon or in the substance of which any such device or mark has 
been counterfeited, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
(2) Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the substance of, any material, any device or mark used for the 
purpose of authenticating any document or electronic record other than the documents described in 
section 338, intending that such device or mark shall be used for the purpose of giving the appearance of 
authenticity to any document then forged or thereafter to be forged on such material, or who with such 
intent, has in his possession any material upon or in the substance of which any such device or mark has  
been counterfeited, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
343. Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will, authority to adopt, or valuable 
security .—Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to cause damage or injury to the public or 
to any person, cancels, destroys or defaces, or attempts to cancel, destroy or deface, or secretes or 
attempts to secrete any document which is or purports to be a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or any 
valuable security, or commits mischief in respect of such document, shall be punished with imprisonment 
for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall 
also be liable to fine.  
344. Falsification of accounts .—Whoever, being a clerk, officer or servant, or employed or acting in 
the capacity of a clerk, officer or servant, wilfully, and with intent to defraud, destroys, alters, mutilates 
or falsifies any book, electronic record, paper, writing, valuable security or account which belongs to or is 
in the possession of his employer, or has been received by him for or on behalf of his employer, or 
wilfully, and with intent to defraud, makes or abets the making of any false entry in, or omits or alters or 
abets the omission or alteration of any material particular from or in, any such book, electronic record, 
paper, writing, valuable security or account, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.  
Explanation .—It shall be sufficient in any charge under this section to allege a general intent to 
defraud without naming any particular person intended to be defrauded or specifying any particular sum 
of money intended to be the subject of the fraud, or any particular day on which the offence was 
committed.  
Of property marks  
 345. Property mark .—(1) A mark used for denoting that movable property belongs to a particular 
person is called a property mark.  
(2) Whoever marks any movable property or goods or any case, package or other receptacle 
containing movable property or goods, or uses any case, package or other receptacle having any mark 
thereon, in a manner reasonably calculated to cause it to be believed that the property or goods so 
marked, or any property or goods contained in any such receptacle so marked, belong to a person to 
whom they do not belong, is said to use a false property mark.  
(3) Whoever uses any false property mark shall, unless he proves that he acted without intent to 
defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or 
with fine, or with both.  
346. Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury .—Whoever removes, destroys, 
defaces or adds to any property mark, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause 
injury to any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
347. Counterfeiting a property mark .—(1) Whoever counterfeits any property mark used by any 
other person shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both.  
(2) Whoever counterfeits any property mark used by a public servant, or any mark used by a public 
servant to denote that any property has been manufactured by a particular person or at a particular time or 

--- PAGE 106 ---
106 
 place, or that the property is of a particular quality or has passed through a particular office, or that it is 
entitled to any exemption, or uses as genuine any such mark knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall 
also be liable to fine.  
348. Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property mark .—Whoever 
makes or has in his possession any die, plate or other instrument for the purpose of counterfeiting a 
property mark, or has in his possession a property mark for the purpose of denoting that any goods belong 
to a person to whom they do not belong, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.  
349. Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark .—Whoever sells, or exposes, or has 
in possession for sale, any goods or things with a counterfeit property mark affixed to or impressed upon 
the same or to or upon any case, package or other receptacle in which such goods are contained, shall, 
unless he proves — 
(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing an offence against this 
section, he had at the time of the commission of the alleged offence no reason to suspect the 
genuineness of the mark; and  
(b) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the information in his 
power with respect to the persons from whom he obtained such goods or things; or  
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently,  
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with 
fine, or with both.  
350. Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods .—(1) Whoever makes any false 
mark upon any case, package or other receptacle containing goods, in a manner reasonably calculated to 
cause any public servant or any other person to believe that such receptacle contains goods which it does 
not contain or that it does not contain goods which it does contain, or that the goods contained in such 
receptacle are of a nature or quality different from the real nature or quality thereof, shall, unless he 
proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.  
(2) Whoever makes use of any false mark in any manner prohibited under sub -section ( 1) shall, 
unless he proves that he acted without intent to defraud,  
be punished as if he had committed the offence under sub -section ( 1). 
CHAPTER XIX  
OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT, ANNOYANCE, DEFAMATION, ETC.  
351. Criminal intimidation .—(1) Whoever threatens another by any means, with any injury to his 
person, reputation or property, or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is interested, 
with intent to cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which he is not legally 
bound to do, or to omit to do any act which that person is legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding 
the execution of such threat, commits criminal intimidation.  
Explanation .—A threat to injure the reputation of any deceased person in whom the person 
threatened is interested, is within this section.  
Illustration . 
A, for the purpose of inducing B to resist from prosecuting a civil suit, threatens to burn B’s house. A 
is guilty of criminal intimidation.  
(2) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.  
(3) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation by threatening to cause death or grievous 
hurt, or to cause the destruction of any property by fire, or to cause an offence punishable with death or 

--- PAGE 107 ---
107 
 imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or to impute 
unchastity to a woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.  
(4) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication, or 
having taken precaution to conceal the name or abode of the person from whom the threat comes, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, in addition 
to the punishment provided for the offence under sub -section ( 1). 
352. Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of peace .—Whoever intentionally insults in 
any manner, and thereby gives provocation to any person, intending or knowing it to be likely that such 
provocation will cause him to break the public peace, or to commit any other offence, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with 
both.  
353. Statements conducing to public mischief .—(1) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any 
statement, false information, rumour, or report, including through electronic means — 
(a) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, any officer, soldier, sailor or airman in the 
Army, Navy or Air Force of India to mutiny or otherwise disregard or fail in his duty as such; or  
(b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear or alarm to the public, or to any section 
of the public whereby any person may be induced to commit an offence against the State or against 
the public tranquillity; or  
(c) with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any class or community of persons to commit 
any offence against any other class or community,  
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.  
(2) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement or report containing false information, 
rumour or alarming news, including through electronic means, with intent to create or promote, or which 
is likely to create or promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or 
community or any other ground whatsoever, feelings of enmity, hatred or ill will between different 
religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, shall be punished with 
imprisonme nt which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.  
(3) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub -section ( 2) in any place of worship or in any 
assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished 
with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.  
Exception .—It does not amount to an offence, within the meaning of this section, when the person 
making, publishing or circulating any such statement, false information, rumour or report, has reasonable 
grounds for believing that such statement, false information, rumour or report is true and makes, 
publishes or circulates it in good faith and without any such intent as aforesaid.  
354. Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be rendered an object of Divine 
displeasure .—Whoever voluntarily causes or attempts to cause any person to do anything which that 
person is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do anything which he is legally entitled to do, by inducing 
or attempting to induce that person to believe that he or any person in whom he is interested will become 
or will be rendered by some act of the offender an object of Divine displeasure if he does not do the thing 
which it is the object of the offender to cause him to do, or if he does the thing which it is the object of 
the offender to cause him to omit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
Illustrations . 
(a) A sits dharna at Z’s door with the intention of causing it to be believed that, by so sitting, he 
renders Z an object of Divine displeasure. A has committed the offence defined in this section.  

--- PAGE 108 ---
108 
 (b) A threatens Z that, unless Z performs a certain act, A will kill one of A’s own children, under 
such circumstances that the killing would be believed to render Z an object of Divine displeasure. A has 
committed the offence defined in this section.  
355. Misconduct in public by a drunken person .—Whoever, in a state of intoxication, appears in 
any public place, or in any place which it is a trespass in him to enter, and there conducts himself in such 
a manner as to cause annoyance to any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to twenty -four hours, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both or with community service.  
Of defamation  
356. Defamation .—(1) Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by 
visible representations, makes or publishes in any manner, any imputation concerning any person 
intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation 
of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person.  
Explanation  1.—It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the 
imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings 
of his family or other near relatives.  
Explanation  2.—It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an 
association or collection of persons as such.  
Explanation  3.—An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to 
defamation.  
Explanation  4.—No imputation is said to harm a person’s reputation, unless that imputation directly 
or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or 
lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that 
person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state 
generally considered as disgraceful.  
Illustrations . 
(a) A says —“Z is an honest man; he never stole B’s watch ”; intending to cause it to be believed that 
Z did steal B’s watch. This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions.  
(b) A is asked who stole B’s watch. A points to Z, intending to cause it to be believed that Z stole B’s 
watch. This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions.  
(c) A draws a picture of Z running away with B’s watch, intending it to be believed that Z stole B’s 
watch. This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions.  
Exception  1.—It is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it be 
for the public good that the imputation should be made or published. Whether or not it is for the public 
good is a question of fact.  
Exception  2.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the 
conduct of a public servant in the discharge of his public functions, or respecting his character, so far as 
his character appears in that conduct, and no further.  
Exception  3.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the 
conduct of any person touching any public question, and respecting his character, so far as his character 
appears in that conduct, and no further.  
Illustration . 
It is not defamation in A to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting Z’s conduct in 
petitioning Government on a public question, in signing a requisition for a meeting on a public question, 
in presiding or attending at such meeting, in forming or joining any society which invites the public 
support, in voting or canvassing for a particular candidate for any situation in the efficient discharge of 
the duties of which the public is interested.  

--- PAGE 109 ---
109 
 Exception  4.—It is not defamation to publish substantially true report of the proceedings of a Court, 
or of the result of any such proceedings.  
Explanation .—A Magistrate or other officer holding an inquiry in open Court preliminary to a trial in 
a Court, is a Court within the meaning of the above section.  
Exception  5.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the 
merits of any case, civil or criminal, which has been decided by a Court, or respecting the conduct of any 
person as a party, witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as far as 
his character appears in that conduct, and no further.  
Illustrations . 
(a) A says —“I think Z’s evidence on that trial is so contradictory that he must be stupid or 
dishonest ”. A is within this exception if he says this in good faith, in as much as the opinion which he 
expresses respects Z’s character as it appears in Z’s conduct as a witness, and no further.  
(b) But if A says —“I do not believe what Z asserted at that trial because I know him to be a man 
without veracity ”; A is not within this exception, in as much as the opinion which expresses of Z’s 
character, is an opinion not founded on Z’s conduct as a witness.  
Exception  6.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion respecting the merits of any 
performance which its author has submitted to the judgment of the public, or respecting the character of 
the author so far as his character appears in such performance, and no further.  
Explanation .—A performance may be submitted to the judgment of the public expressly or by acts on 
the part of the author which imply such submission to the judgment of the public.  
Illustrations . 
(a) A person who publishes a book, submits that book to the judgment of the public.  
(b) A person who makes a speech in public, submits that speech to the judgment of the public.  
(c) An actor or singer who appears on a public stage, submits his acting or singing to the judgment of 
the public.  
(d) A says of a book published by Z —“Z’s book is foolish; Z must be a weak man. Z’s book is 
indecent; Z must be a man of impure mind ”. A is within the exception, if he says this in good faith, in as 
much as the opinion which he expresses of Z respects Z’s character only so far as it appears in Z’s book, 
and no further.  
(e) But if A says “I am not surprised that Z’s book is foolish and indecent, for he is a weak man and a 
libertine ”. A is not within this exception, in as much as the opinion which he expresses of Z’s character is 
an opinion not founded on Z’s book.  
Exception  7.—It is not defamation in a person having over another any authority, either conferred by 
law or arising out of a lawful contract made with that other, to pass in good faith any censure on the 
conduct of that other in matters to which such lawful authority relates.  
Illustration . 
A Judge censuring in good faith the conduct of a witness, or of an officer of the Court; a head of a 
department censuring in good faith those who are under his orders, a parent censuring in good faith a 
child in the presence of other children; a school master, whose authority is derived from a parent, 
censuring in good faith a pupil in the presence of other pupils; a master censuring a servant in good faith 
for remissness in service; a banker censuring in good faith the cashier of his bank for the conduct o f such 
cashier as such cashier are within this exception.  
Exception  8.—It is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of 
those who have lawful authority over that person with respect to the subject -matter of accusation.  
 
 

--- PAGE 110 ---
110 
 Illustration . 
If A in good faith accuses Z before a Magistrate; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a 
servant, to Z’s master; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a child, to Z’s father , A is within 
this exception.  
Exception  9.—It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that 
the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interests of the person making it, or of any 
other person, or for the public good.  
Illustrations . 
(a) A, a shopkeeper, says to B, who manages his business —“Sell nothing to Z unless he pays you 
ready money, for I have no opinion of his honesty ”. A is within the exception, if he has made this 
imputation on Z in good faith for the protection of his own interests.  
(b) A, a Magistrate, in making a report to his own superior officer, casts an imputation on the 
character of Z. Here, if the imputation is made in good faith, and for the public good, A is within the 
exception.  
Exception  10.—It is not defamation to convey a caution, in good faith, to one person against another, 
provided that such caution be intended for the good of the person to whom it is conveyed, or of some 
person in whom that person is interested, or for the public good.  
(2) Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both , or with community service.  
(3) Whoever prints or engraves any matter, knowing or having good reason to believe that such 
matter is defamatory of any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.  
(4) Whoever sells or offers for sale any printed or engraved substance containing defamatory matter, 
knowing that it contains such matter, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.  
Of breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person  
357. Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person .—Whoever, being 
bound by a lawful contract to attend on or to supply the wants of any person who, by reason of youth, or 
of unsoundness of mind, or of a disease or bodily weakness, is helpless or incapable of providing for his 
own safety or of supplying his own wants, voluntarily omits so to do, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to five t housand rupees, or with both.  
CHAPTER XX  
REPEAL AND SAVINGS  
358. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Code referred to in sub -section ( 1), it shall not affect, — 
(a) the previous operation of the Code so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; 
or 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the Code so 
repealed; or  
(c) any penalty, or punishment incurred in respect of any offences committed against the Code so 
repealed; or  
(d) any investigation or remedy in respect of any such penalty, or punishment; or  
(e) any proceeding, investigation or remedy in respect of any such penalty or punishment as 
aforesaid, and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such 
penalty may be imposed as if that Code had not been repealed.  
(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Code shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Sanhita.  

--- PAGE 111 ---
111 
 (4) The mention of particular matters in sub -section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
general application of  section 6  of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of 
the repeal.  
  

--- PAGE 112 ---
112 
 STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
In the year 1834, the first Indian Law Commission was constituted under the Chairman -ship of Lord 
Thomas Babington Macaulay to examine the jurisdiction, power and rules of the  existing Courts as well 
as the police establishments and the laws in force in India.  
2. The Commission suggested various enactments to the Government. One of the  important 
recommendations made by the Commission was on, Indian Penal Code which was  enacted in 1860 and 
the said Code is still continuing in the country with some amendments  made thereto from time to time.  
3. The Government of India considered it expedient and necessary to review the  existing criminal 
laws with an aim to strengthen law and order and also focus on simplifying  legal procedure so that ease 
of living is ensured to the common man. The Government also  considered to make existing laws relevant 
to the contemporary situation and provide speedy  justice to common man. Accordingly, various 
stakeholders were consulted keeping in mind  contemporary needs and aspirations of the people and with 
a view to create a legal structure  which is citizen centric and to secure life and liberty of the citizens.  
4. Now, it is proposed to enact a new law, namely, the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bill,  2023 by 
repealing the Indian Penal Code to streamline provisions relating to offences and  penalties. It is proposed 
to provide first time community service as one of the punishments  for petty offences. The offences 
against women and children, murder and offences against  the State have been given precedence. The 
various offences have been made gender neutral.  In order to deal effectively with the problem of 
organised crimes and terrorist activities, new  offences of terrorist acts and organised crime have been 
added in the Bill with deterrent  punishments. A new offence on acts of secession, armed rebellion, 
subversive activities,  separatist activities or endangering sovereignty or unity and integrity of India has 
also been  added. The fines and punishment for various offences have also been suitably enhanced.  
5. Accordingly, a Bill, namely, the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 was introduced in the Lok Sabha 
on 11th August, 2023. The Bill was referred to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs for its consideration and report. The Committee after deliberations made its 
recommendations in its report submitted on 10th November, 2023. The recommendations made by the 
Committee have been considered by the Government and it has been decided to withdraw the Bill 
pending in Lok Sabha and introd uce a new Bill incorporating therein those recommendations made by the 
Committee that have been accepted by the Government.  
6. The Notes on Clauses explains the various provisions of the Bill.  
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.   
 
 
 
 
AMIT SHAH.  
 
NEW DELHI;  
The 9th August , 2023.  

